# Introduction to Dynamic SQL Object (DSQL)

DSQL is a object aiding in building a query. One object represents one query and collect information about fields, conditions and expressions. A DSQL object may contain other DSQL objects which is used for expressions and sub-selects.DSQL can convert itself into a PDO parametric query and iterate through results. As a developer it's important that you remember that DSQL will not produce more than one query at a time.## Goals of DSQL	Once query object is created it will accumulate information about SQL conditions, joins, fields, tables. It even stores information about parametric variables and sub-queries. This is important when you need to pass query information from one object to another, between models or even allow controller or add-on to interact with standard query. Multiple queries may exist and can even be executed simultaneously without affecting each-other.> DSQL consolidates all the information necessary for creating a query.Most ORMs produce query in one go. You can create query in one object then pass it on to another object to add additional queries or joins.DSQL allows you to add or remove fields, conditions, arguments or anything else at any time. Even after you perform one select, you can re-use the object - extend the query or execute different type of query.> Dynamic Query is grown organically. At any point query can have more fields, conditions or more join added.When you design queries yourself, you must be aware of differences between different SQL implementations and extensions. DSQL can hide some of the differences between database vendors behind it's object interface.> You create query for all database vendors.Many ORMs give you a way to use parametric queries, but would not enforce their use. Their limited flexibility often leaves a gap for developers to hard-wire some hand-written queries with a nasty SQL Injection bugs.DSQL obsoletes SQL language completely and allows you to build ANY query or expression (including select, insert, update, delete, replace and some other queries). If DSQL does not support some type of syntax natively, you can create a new method in DSQL object to handle it.
> DSQL should not be used on it's own. DSQL is a tool used by Relational Models and must only be used together with appropriate model.## What features are excluded by design from DSQLDSQL have no knowledge of your database, tables or table fields. All of the fields must be explicitly specified. DSQL will never change the database structure. DSQL will not have any complex logic apart from query 
building.DSQL does not attempt to implement all the possible fetching mechanisms and completely overlap PDO. In fact - you can still access PDO object embedded inside DSQL if you execute care.