# Direct Use of DSQL

## DSQL Modes	With DSQL you can set arguments first and then decide on the template for your query. DSQL recognizes a number of SQL query templates: ```'select'=>"select [options] [field] [from] [table] [join] [where] [group] [having] [order] [limit]" 'insert'=>"insert [options_insert] into [table_noalias] ([set_fields]) values ([set_values])" 'replace'=>"replace [options_replace] into [table_noalias] ([set_fields]) values ([set_value])" 'update'=>"update [table_noalias] set [set] [where]" 'delete'=>"delete from  [table_noalias] [where]" 'truncate'=>'truncate table [table_noalias]'
```

To render the templates, all the respective renderers exist (such as render_options, render_field, render_from, etc). Data is typically stored in property "args" until execution. Below is the list of functions you can call on the dsql() object to affect the queries:* `option("ignore")`* `field($field, $table, $alias)` // uses multiple call formats* `table($table, $alias)` // uses multiple call formats* `where($field,$condition,$value)`  // uses multiple formats* `join($table, $master_field, $join_type)` // uses multiple formats* `group("field")`* `order($field, $desc)` // uses multiple formats* `limit($count,$offset)`* `set($field,$value)` // used by insert, replace and update to set new field valuesWhen using any of the mentioned templates, the property "mode" of dsql object will be set to the name of the template (such as 'update' or 'insert').## Properties of DSQL Object	I have already mentioned property "template", "args" and "mode", but there are more properties. All of them are defined public and you can access them for reading, but avoid changing them.* `params` - During rendering of the query, PDO parameter values are stored here.* `stmt` - Contains PDO object, in case you need to use some custom PDO values or properties* `main_table` - When using joins, this contains the name (or alias) of main table, which is sometimes prefixed to the fields.* `default_field` - Contains name of the field to use if you don't set any fields. Asterisk by default.* `default_exception` - will throw Exception_DB by default* `param_base` - prefix used when creating params for PDO* `debug` - can be switched on by calling debug() method. Will echo query before executing it.* `sql_templates` - contains array with pre-defined modes and templates* `id_field` - can be set if you wish that DSQL would return id as key when iterating. 
## Cloning and duplicating DSQL	
Any DSQL object can be safely cloned. It will NOT however clone any arguments. Alternatively you can call dsql() method, which will create new instance of the same class, very similar to 
newInstance().If you are using expr(), it will return a new object with the template as you specify in the argument. This is done to leave your original query intact. If don't want new object, useExpr() will change template without cloning.## Overloaded arguments	Similarly how you could specify different argument types is jQuery methods, you can specify different argument types to the methods. Keep your code clean by using most effective one, e.g. use where('id',123) instead of where('id','=',123)## Specifying TableUse this argument to set a primary table or even multiple tables for your query. When specifying multiple tables, you would most likely need to have where condition. Call like this:* `table('user')`* `table('user','u')` // aliases table with "u"* `table('user')->table('salary')` // specify multiple tables* `table(array('user','salary'))` // identical to previous line* `table(array('u'=>'user','s'=>'salary'))` // specify aliases and tables## Getting field with table prefix	
When a single table is used, you can use method getField($field) to generate expression with appropriate table prefix and back-ticked field. Please do not confuse this with getElement() or model->getField();```$q=$this->api->db->dsql();$field = $q->table('book','b')->getField('id'); // will contain expression for: `b`.`id````
## Specifying fields
Can add physical fields or fields expressed with formula (expressions) to the query. Can also alias fields. Formats:* `field('name')`* `field('name','user')`  
    second argument specified table* `field('name','user')->field('line1','address')`* `field('name,surname')`  
    multiple fields in one go* `field(array('name','surname'))`  
    can specify as array* `field(array('n'=>'name','s'=>'surname'))`  
    use aliases for fields* `field(array('n'=>'name'), 'user')`  
    combine explicit table and field alias* `field($q->expr('year(now)-year(birth)',age')`  
    alias expression* `field(array('age'=>$q->expr('year(now)-year(birth)')))`  
    multiple expressions* `field($q->dsql()->table('book')->field('count(*)'),'books')`  
    subquery* if you don't call `field()` at all, "*" will be selected.	## Adding Conditions (where)	
Methods we have reviewed till now in details have been using "safe" arguments. When you are using where() you can use un-safe argument. While we still advise you to perform input validation from $_GET(), but in normal circumstances it's quite safe to use those as the last argument to where.Below are execution examples:* `where('id',1)`  
    argument 1 here is unsafe, will use parametric variable* `where('id','>',1)`  
    can use any operation. Second argument must be safe* `where('id>',1)`  
    same as above, but only limited number of operators are supported: <,>,<=,>=,<>,!=,in,not in,like,is and spaces* `where('expired','<',$q->expr('now()'))`  
    expression overrides unsafe variable, will not use param* `where('age',$q->expr('between 5 and 18'))`  
    can be used with safe variables* `where('age',$q->expr('between [min] and [max]')->setCustom('min',$min)->setCustom('max',$max))`  
    use this with un-safe variables* `where('book_id', $q->dsql()->table('sale')->field('book_id'))`  
    subquery* `where('state',array('open','closed','resolved'))`   
    state in ('...','...')* `where($q->expr('length(password)'), '>', $maxlen)`  
    expressionWhen you are calling where() multiple times like this, all the conditions are joined using "and" clause. DSQL also supports OR, but multiple OR conditions are considered a single where() condition. For example:    select user where is_active=1 and (id=1 or id=2)
    
When you look at the query like this, you should see that area in brackets is actually an expression. A method orExpr() can help you produce this expression:* `where('is_active',1)->where($q->orExpr()->where('id',1)->where('id',2))`* `where('is_active',1)->where(array(array('id',1),array('id',2)))`  
    same, shortcut* `where('is_active',1)->where(array('name is null','surname is null'))`The second and third format here would use orExpr() internally, but possibly is a little bit more  readable (especially if you write it on multiple lines).Finally if you want to compare two fields, you can use something like this:* `where('income','>',$q->expr($q->bt('expense'))`  
    where \`income\`>\`expense\`* `where('income','>',$q->getField('expense'))`  
    better one. Use this.The second format here will also use a table prefix for expense, which is nice when you are using multiple joins. You can also use getField for the first argument:* `where($q->getField('income'),'>',$q->getField('expense'))`Finally, you can also use andExpr(), which works identical to orExpr().    
```$q=$this->api->db->dsql()->table('book');$q->where('approved',1)->where($q->orExpr()	->where('state','submitted')->where($q->andExpr()		->where('state','pending')->where('filled',1)));
```

Resulting query:```select * from book where `approved`=1 and	(`state`='submitted' or 		(`state`='pending' and `filled`=1)	)
```

## Using having()	The "having()" method is described as an alias to where() except that the result for all having() clauses will be stored in a separate location and will render under a separate tag. Anything written above for where() also apply for having().## Joining tables join()	With this method, you can create all sorts of joins and query data from multiple tables. Join will use default field names, which follow the following principle: "If you have "book" and "author" table, joining them would use book.author_id=author.id expression.".I advise you to use this field naming convention in your database design, which will simplify your code and make it more readable. The examples below, assume that you already have a query object and the primary table is set:
    $b=$this->api->db->dsql()->table('book');* `join('author')`    
    join author on author.id=book.author_id* `join(array('a'=>'author'))`  
    same, but sets alias to `a`* `join('chapter.book_id')`  
    join chapter on chapter.book_id=book.id* `join(array('c'=>'chapter.book_id'))`  
    same but sets alias to `c`* `join(array('a'=>'author','c'=>'chapter.book_id'))`  
    two joinsIf you are not using the standard convention you can use second argument to specify the field in your main table (book):* `join('author','written_by')`  
    join author on author.id=book.written_by* `join('info.issn','issn')`      join info on info.issn=book.issnIf you need a further flexibility with the join, you can use expressions. When combined with orExpr / andExpr it gives you quite powerful tool:* `join('info',$q->andExpr()->where('info.issn',$q->getField('issn')->where('info.is_active',1))`  
    join info on info.issn=book.issn and info.is_active=1The third argument can be used to change the join type. It is an unsafe argument.* `join('info',null,'inner')`  
    inner join. By default "left" join is used
## Using grouping (group())	Group specifies how the results will be grouped (group by):* `group('sex')`* `group($q->expr('year(created)'))`* `group('sex,age')`* `group(array('sex',$q->expr('year(created)')))`## Ordering results (order())	Ordering can be done my one or several fields and in two directions.* `order('age')`* `order('age','desc')`  
    reverse order* `order('age',true)`    
    same as above, reverse oredr* `order('age,sex')`   
    order by age, sex (multiple fields)* `order(array('age','sex'))`* `order('age desc, sex')`* `order(array('age desc','sex'))`* `order($q->expr('year(birth)'))`## Options	There are two methods for setting options:* option('calc_found_rows'); // option for select* option_insert('ignore'); // option for insertMore option methods could be added later.## Using setCustom	If DSQL template encounters a tag which it can't find method to render, it will next check args['custom'] to see if it might have been set directly. This allows you to set a custom values for the expression tags. If you use one of the pre-defined tags, then your value will override the default rendering mechanism. addCustom() uses consume() escaping on it's argument.    $q=$this->api->db->dsql()->expr('show table [mytag]'); 
* `addCustom('mytag','123')`  
    produces 123* `addCustom('mytag',$q->bt('user'))`  
    produces \`user\`* `addCustom('mytag',$q->expr('foo bar')`  
    produces foo bar* `addCustom('mytag',$q->escape(123))`  
    produces :a1 param## Deleting arguments	By calling method del() you can get rid of some arguments which have been set before:* `field('bleh')->del('fields')->field('name')`  
    select name from ..* reset()   
    will delete all argumentsThe most popular use is when you need to change fields on arbitrary query:    $y=clone $q;    $count = $y->del('fields')->field('count(*)')->getOne();
    
## Calling Methods (call() and fx())	
When you call your own methods in SQL the typical syntax is:    call myfunc(args) 
To do this with DSQL, you should use the following pattern:    $q=$this->api->db->dsql();    $q->call('myfunc',array($arg1, $arg2));
To call standard functions you can use fx() method.```
$q=$this->api->db->dsql();$q->call('myfunc',array($arg1, 	$q->dsql()->fx('if',array($x1,$x2,$x3)))); // call myfunc($arg1, if($x1,$x2,$x3))```
*Note: `call()` and `fx()` will not clone your query, so use dsql() if necessary.*## Using set()	You should use set() for insert and update. In fact, you can use something like this:```$q=$this->api->db->dsql();$q->set('name','John')->set($user_data);$q->where('username',$username)->limit(1);if(!$q->get()){	$q->insert();}else{	$q->update();}
```

## WHY YOU SHOULDN'T BUILD YOUR QUERIES WITH DSQL

Within DSQL you might find the comfort and control over SQL queries, but you must try to avoid using DSQL directly. Relational Models are higher level objects which give you much simpler syntax with very minimal performance hit.	## Cross-SQL compatibility methods and shortcuts	
Gradually, as Agile Toolkit starts supporting more database engines, it will implement more compatibility methods. Currently the following methods are present:* `concat(arg,arg,…)`  
    string concatination* `describe(table)`  
    select table schema* `random()`  
    return random value 0..1* `sum(field)`  
    returns expression for sum(..)* `count(field)`  
    returns expression for count(..). Argument is '*' if unspecified.## Query Methods	Calling any of the methods below, will execute your query. Those methods take no arguments, but will render query collecting previously specified data.* `execute()`  
    will not change template. Use with your own expression.* `select()`* `insert()`* `update()`* `replace()`* `delete()`* `truncate()`Additionally there are some combinations of executing query and fetching data. * `get()`  
    returns array of hashes containing data* `getOne()`  
    returns scalar value, first row first column* `getRow()`  
    return first row only, but as non-associative array
* `getHash()`  
    return first row as a hash* `fetch()`   
    returns one row as hash. Calling this or previous two methods multiple times will return further data rows or null if no more data is there.## Iterating through results	You can use DSQL as an iterator:```$q=$this->api->db->dsql();$q->table('book')->where('is_active',1);foreach($q as $data){	$qq = clone $q;	$qq->where('id',$data['id'])		->set('data',json_encode(..))		->update();}
```

## Using preexec	Normally, while you build the query you can set an options, but the query is only executed when you start iterating through it. If you wish to execute query quicker you can use preexec() method. This allows you to have some information about the query even before you start iterating. You can also execute multiple queries simultaneously for better performance.```$q=$this->api->db->dsql();$q->table('book')->where('is_active',1);$rows = $q->calc_found_rows()->preexec()->foundRows();foreach($q as $data){	$qq = clone $q;	$qq->where('id',$data['id'])		->set('data',json_encode(..))		->update();}```
In this example, we were able to determine number of $rows in result set before we started iterating through the selected cursor and avoided executing query twice.## Debugging
You can use $dsql->debug() to turn on debugging mode for the query. This will output some data using "echo" when the query is being rendered. DSQL will use font colors / HTML to highlight different parts of query.