# Introduction to Models

In our software data is arranged into logical tables or collections. It's sensible to associate data with a set of relevant actions. PHP objects is are an ideal container for both the data and the set of methods which can be applied on the data.Normally a single model object represents a single row of data, however this approach is impractical. Agile Toolkit uses a different approach for the models, where the model can load any row of data or even perform operations on all data set. If you have prior experience with other data frameworks such as Doctrine, Active Record or some other ORM, you should pay attention to how "Model" works in Agile Toolkit.## The Dataset	Models in Agile Toolkit are not limited to SQL, but can in fact work with many different data drivers. Therefore I will define all the possible data you can access through one model as a Dataset.Dataset is determined by 3 things: 1) Driver 2) Table 3) Scope.Driver | Table | Condition
| ------------ | ------------- | ------------ |
SQL + Database/Schema | Table Name | set of "where" conditions joined by AND clause
Memcache | Key Prefix | Sub-prefix
MongoDB|Collection Name | Conditions
Redis + Object Type | Object name | Prefix


## Relational Model
A significant segment of the database implementations are so called RDBMS - Relational Database Management Systems. Notable for their flexibility in data querying they utilize a standardized query language - SQL. Agile Toolkit takes advantage of the powerful features of RDBMS (joining, sub-selects, expressions) and has a significantly enhanced model class to work directly with the database through DSQL.You can find a detailed description of relational models further in this book. Even through the relational models are significantly enhanced, they still retain the functionality of regular models, so everything described in this chapter would also apply to relational models.## setSource - Primary Source	A non-relational models can use setSource() method to associate themselves with a driver. Driver is an object of class extending Controller_Data. Model will route some of the operations to the controller, such as loading, saving and deleting records.Model can only have one source and because relational models already using SQL you cannot specify a different source.

## addCache - Caches	A single model can have several caches associated with it. For example a relational model may have Session cache.When loading model with associated cache - the first attempt is made to load the model from the cache directly. If model is not found in cache(s), the primary source is used as a fall-back.When saving model data, it will be also saved into all the associated caches.The data controllers typically can be used as either primary source or as a cache.## Model data and methods	In a typical ORM implementation, model data is stored in model properties while reserving all the property names beginning with underscore. Agile Toolkit stores model data as array in a single property called "data". To access the data you can use set(), get() or array-access (square brackets) format.Before you can access the data, however, you must define some fields. Below is a typical implementation of a model in Agile Toolkit. Please note that model is defined using PHP language and it's always defined as a class.```class Model_User extends Model {	function init(){		parent::init();		$this->addField('name');		$this->addField('surname'); 		$this->addField('daily_salary');		$this->addField('due_payment');	}	function goToWork(){		$this['due_payment'] = $this['due_payment']			+$this['daily_salary'];		return $this;	}	function paySalary(){		echo "Paying ".$this['name']." amount of ".			$this['due_payment'];	}} $m=$this->add('Model_User');$m['name']='John';$m['daily_salary']=150; for($day=1;$day<7;$day++) $m->goToWork()$m->paySalary();
```

As you see in the example, model User's model combines definition of the fields with the methods to perform business operations with the model. When you design model methods, it's important that you follow these guidelines:* Never assume presence of UI.* Avoid addressing "owner" object.* Keep object hierarchy in mind. Extend "User" model to create "Manager" model.* All field names must be uniqueBy following these guidelines, you can design a model which can work with magnitude of data sources.## Loading and Saving models	You can save your model data to a primary source driver or load data if you know the "id" of the record. The "id" is not necessarily a number, but it uniquely defines a data within source / table.Let's extend our user model by adding "Session" source.```class Model_User extends Model {	public $table='user';	function init(){		parent::init(); 				$this->setSource('Session');
```	
Once source is set, you can use a number of additional operations:```$m['name']='John';$m['daily_salary']=150;$m->save();echo $m->id;	// will contain a generated ID $m->load($other_id);	// load different record into model
```

Model objects in Agile Toolkit are not tied in with any particular record. They can load any (but one) record from the data-set and save it. A single object can also iterate through the data-set by loading each individual record.There are only two properties which are affected when you load model: "data" and "id". Next example demonstrates how to display list of all the users and their respective "due_payment" field:```
foreach($m as $row){	echo "Please pay ".$row['daily_salary']." to ".		$row['name']."\n";}
```

When iterating, the $row becomes automatically associated with the "data" property, however if you are willing to change the content of the model, you should use the $m instead:```foreach($m as $row){	$m->paySalary();}
```

Model's method loaded() will return true if model have been loaded with any data from the source and false otherwise.```$m=$this->add('Model_Table');$m->loaded();	// false$m->load(1);$m->loaded();	// true$m->unload();$m->loaded();	// false
```


## Deleting model data	You can delete a single record of data by calling delete($id) method or you can remove all data by calling deleteAll(). If you do not pass $id to delete() method, then the currently loaded data will be deleted.