## Introduction to Relational Models of Agile Toolkit (ORM)

Relational Model base class (Model_Table) extends standard models and enhances them with various features. If you are already familiar with other ORM (Object Relational Mapper), you might wonder why it was necessary for Agile Toolkit to have it's own Model implementation.The fact is that Agile Toolkit is incredibly agile in the way how you are able t oco## Goal: Unified factory and entity	
In a traditional design, you require to have a factory object (or class) which will produce objects for each data record. As I have already mentioned in the previous chapter, the Model implementation in Agile Toolkit unifies both purposes together. The primary reason for this decision is the nature of a short-lived PHP requests. While the separate class design is better for threaded Java, in PHP you would need to create two classes per model on every request.Unifying everything into a single model comes at a cost and that's why a single model object is allowed to load different data entries. The same principle applies to the relational model. ## Goal: Simplification of SQL	 As you describe the model, it will behind the scenes build the DSQL object which can be used for accessing, saving and deleting your model data. The nature of DSQL which allows it to perform multiple queries perfectly matches the needs of reusable models. At the same time, the power and flexibility of DSQL can still be accessed, if you want to optimize your queries.In typical ORM design, you must either use their limited features or use completely different way to address database. For example, you normally are unable to perform action on multiple records through ORM interface, and if you wish to do so, you would need to come up with a full query yourself.Agile Toolkit models can provide you with a pre-made DSQL object for you which you can extend and modify.## Goal: Integrity of DataSet	
Relational models perfectly applies the concept of data-set to your database. You can define multiple models which access the same table, but would have a different set of conditions and therefore would have different data-sets.Agile Toolkit ensures that you would not be able to accidentally go outside of the data-set when you query, update, delete or insert data.