# Relational Model Fields

Model uses objects to describe each of it's field. Therefore when you create a model with 10 fields, it would populate at least 12 objects: Model's object. One object for each field. DSQL object for a model in general. Field object play a very direct role in creating queries for the model such as select, update and insert queries.
Normally you would rely on the standard Model Field class, which is populated when you call addField(), however you should know that it's possible to extend fields significantly.
## Field Meta-information	One of he significant roles carried out by Model Field is collecting of the information about the field. Information such as caption, type, possible values, associated model is stored in Field's properties and can be extended to hold even more information such as caption, validation rules etc.## Query Generation	Model will operate with internal DSQL object. It is however responsibility for the field object to populate queries with field information.## Basic Use	You would typically create a new field by calling addField($name) method. This method is a shortcut for “return add('Field',$name);” but should be used for standard field definition.```$this->addField('name');$this->addField('gender')->enum(array('m','f'));$this->addfield('language')->setValueList($languages);
```

There are several classes which extend “Field”, such as:* `Field_Reference` - implements one-to-many relation field* `Field_Expression` - implements a custom SQL query readonly field* `Field_Deleted` - implements field used for soft-delete* `filestore/Field_File` - implements field for referencing uploaded files* `filestore/File_Image` - implements field for images and thumbnailsSome of them will automatically be used by the Model when you call a dedicated method (addExpression(), hasOne()), others can me manually added using add() method.The short_name of the field object corresponds to the field name and will be used for internal referencing as well as in result sets. If you pass second argument to addField(), then you can specify a different actual database field.    $this->addField('name','full_name');    $field = $this->getElement('name');
    
Anything what was said in the AbstractObject section still applies to the field, for example - you can remove fields from model: $field->destroy();## Relational Model Fields and DSQL	Since fields are associated with models and models know which table they work with, you can use Fields of Relational Models inside SQL expressions.    $model->dsql()	    ->set($model->getElement('name'),'John')	    ->update();
	    
It's highly advisable that if you use field of a model $model, you should use the query from $model->dsql(); ## Definitions: type	Several methods of the field are acting to describe model type.* `type()`   
    will specify the primary type of the field. Default value is text, but could also be: int, date, money, boolean. Views will attempt to properly display recognized fields, for example, date will be converted to a regional format on Grid and will use date-picker inside a form.* `display()`  
    specifies the exact field / column class to use for this field. When Form displays fields it relies to objects extended from Form_Field. By specifying value here, you can define how to display the value. `$model->addField('pass')->display('password');` If you specify the array, you can define the particular value for each view: `display(array('form'=>'password', 'grid'=>'text'));` You may also specify fields from add-ons in the format of 'addon/field_name'.* `allowHTML()`  
    can be set to "true" if you want field to be able and store HTML. By default forms will strip HTML from the input for security. If you wish to display HTML in-line, you might need to use setHTML() method of the template engine. * mandatory()  
    setting this to true will present the field as a mandatory on forms.* `defaultValue()`  
    specified value will be set to the field by default.
    
You must remember, that properties of a model serve the purpose of configuring Views to comply with your configuration. They will not restrict or validate the actual model. For example - you can still create model entry with a empty mandatory field.If you wish to validate fields on the model level, you will need to use beforeSave hook, this will have a system-wide access regardless of who is accessing the model. Even if you create a validation like that, you can still use model's DSQL to manually create a query which would bypass the validation.
## Actual Fields	Typically there are many more fields in a model than you would need to display on the forms. With actual fields, you can specify which fields you need to display to user and in which order.While actual fields primarily is a functionality of a respective view (such as defining which columns are visible inside grid), it also has impact on the query. Agile Toolkit models will never use "*" to load model data.    $page->add('Grid')	    ->setModel('User',array('name','email'));
	    
This code will display grid with only two fields in exactly the specified order. Not always you would wan to specify a list of fields. If field list is omitted, then model will attempt to determine which fields to display based on number of flags.* `system()`  
     field will be loaded by model always , even if not present in actual fields. Setting system to true will also hide the field, but it can be un-hidden.* `hidden()`  
    field does not appear in the grid, form etc unless specifically added or requested by actual fields* `editable()` / `visible()`  
    overrides hidden but for only particular widgets. E.g. if field is hidden, but editable it will appear on the form, but not in grid. Setting editable(false) will hide field from form even if it’s not hidden.* `readonly()`   
    the field will appear on the editable form but will be displayed using read-only field.These methods can accept "true", "false" or "undefined" value.	    
	    
## Grid-related attributes	Several attributes change how fields are displayed inside a grid or filter:* `searchable()`   
    makes field visible in filter form.* `sortable()`  
    turns on sorting control on the grid column.	    
## Value lists and foreign keys	Some fields contain one value,  but the value needs to be displayed differently. For example it's typical to have 'm' for Male and 'f' for Female.* `listData()`  
    Specify associative array used to decode the value of the field. Inside a Grid, the key value will be substituted with the string: array('m'=>'Male'); Inside a form, the field will be presented as a drop-down.* `enum()`   
    specify array (without keys) if you only only want a drop-down but do not want value substitution: `enum(array('small','medium','large'))`* `emptyValue()`  
    if your list value is not mandatory, it will allow user to select an empty value inside a drop-down. This method allows you to specify the value which will be presented to the user on that option: `emptyValue('Select Size')`;    
## Low-level properties	There are some properties which are used on a low-level and allows to change the way how field queries are created. Do not call those methods directly unless you know what you are doing:* `from()`  
    specify joined table to which field belongs. Instead you can call addField() method on a join object.* `actual()`   
    used to change the actual name of the field inside a table. Using second argument to addField() allows you to specify this value.
    
## Specifying additional attributes	You may specify additional attributes by calling setterGetter() method:    $model->addField('bio')->setterGetter('hint','Type your bio here');
You would need to extend views to make them capable of interpreting your additional parameters. You can also access properties directly if you prefer it that way.## Creating Your Own Field Class
In several situations, you would want to have your own field class, such as:* You are willing to change many properties to a different default at the same time.* You would like to use custom behavior for query generations* You wish to place hooks inside the modelsIf you are willing to create your own field, be sure to extend it from the "Field" class.	## Expressions	Normally, when Model builds a query it asks every field listed in the "actual fields" list to add itself into dsql(). Fields will call the field() method to update the query of the model, from inside of the updateSelectQuery(). The "Field_Expression" redefines the method to insert user-defined expression into the model query.Additionally expression field will also change number of flags. editable() will return false.Expression filed introduces one new property "expr" which stores your expression which can be expressed either as a string, as a DSQL expression or as a call-back. Use `set()` to specify the expression. Model have a method `addExpression()`, which will create expression field for you:    $model->addExpression('full_name')	    ->set('concat(name," ",surname)');
When you are building expressions, be mindful that the fields you are referenced are SQL fields and are not model fields. 	    
	    